INTRODUCTION

This script installs PHP (and Apache and MySQL, if not already present) according to the
best practices discussed here:

http://punkave.com/window/2010/03/08/faster-php-kill-kill

You can run it more than once, for instance if you wish to upgrade to a newer
release of PHP.

LIMITATIONS

This script is for Ubuntu systems ONLY. 

WHAT YOU GET

This script installs the specified version of PHP, from source, obtained directly
from the official php.net mirrors. PHP is installed to /usr/local/bin. You get
both the php commmand line binary and the PHP CGI/FastCGI binary.

Your Apache server will be reconfigured to use FastCGI rather than mod_php for
drastically better average performance when the server is also responsible for
serving images, CSS, JavaScript, et cetera. See the article cited above for details.

Your php.ini file will be tweaked to better accommodate the needs of Apostrophe and 
other PHP frameworks. If you're picky about these things, be sure to review what this 
script appends to /usr/local/lib/php.ini.

Apache and MySQL are also installed if you don't already have them, as well
as many required libraries for PHP.

Only PHP is installed from source. Everything else is installed via Ubuntu
packages. We don't believe in maintaining anything from source unless you have
to, but having the latest version of PHP itself is important to us.

WARNINGS

Command line PHP will wind up in /usr/local/bin. Make sure your PATH looks there
(even for cron jobs that invoke PHP).

FastCGI does not support overriding php.ini via .htaccess files. If you have
any php_value settings, Apache will display an error. Move those settings into
php.ini.

If you experience out of memory errors, edit /var/local/fcgi/php-cgi-wrapper.fcgi 
and reduce the PHP_FCGI_CHILDREN setting to a smaller figure. Then restart Apache, 
or just do:

killall php-cgi

Then hit your server with some PHP traffic to make sure you've brought the
setting down enough. Repeat if needed. You'll have best results if your server
has some swap space available to provide headroom.

Read http://punkave.com/window/2010/03/08/faster-php-kill-kill to understand 
everything that is happening here and how to deal with anything that doesn't 
work out.

USAGE INSTRUCTIONS

To install PHP version 5.3.10, with 5 PHP processes, run this command from a
folder where you're OK with having additional subfolders created, such as
/usr/local/src:

bash OptimumPHP.bash 5.3.10 6

NOTE: choosing the right number of PHP processes is quite important, so read on.

"What's a PHP process?" Each PHP process is a continuously running php-cgi process
that is reused to handle more connections (and periodically restarted). The number
of PHP processes you have is the number of simultaneous requests your server
can field without requiring any to wait.

"How many PHP processes can I have?" If your PHP processes top out around 80MB,
then 6 processes will take up 480MB, close to half the RAM on a server with
1GB of RAM (which must also run MySQL, Apache and so on). If you have a server
with no swap space you want to make sure you don't run out as 500 errors
will follow. Whether your server is physical or virtual, we recommend 
swap space equal to at least half the physical memory size to allow reasonable
headroom.

"What happens if I pick too large a number?" If you have swap space on your
server, it may just slow down. If you have no swap space, it is critical not
to make this setting too large. If you experience out of memory errors,
edit /var/local/fcgi/php-cgi-wrapper.fcgi and reduce the PHP_FCGI_CHILDREN setting
to a smaller figure. Then restart Apache, or just do:

killall php-cgi

Then hit your server with some PHP traffic to make sure you've brought the
setting down enough. Repeat if necessary until you find the sweet spot.

"How big are my PHP processes?" Look at the RSIZE value reported in 'top' for
your Apache processes (if you are using plain old mod_php - if you don't know,
you probably have mod_php). If you are already using FastCGI, look at your
PHP processes. You can subtract a little overhead from Apache processes since
they do contain a bit of non-PHP related stuff.

"Shouldn't I just run lots of PHP processes and use swap space?" Not really.
If you have too much traffic you'll just grind your hard drive and slow down.
Better to let connections queue up and wait gracefully than to completely crush your
server to the point where you can't ssh in to tune it.

"Why do you do (X) instead of (Y)?" This setup works well for us. You can read
more about our rationale for it at the article I've cited twice already. Feedback 
is welcome there.

CREDITS

OptimumPHP was developed by P'unk Avenue, the creators of Apostrophe. Apostrophe
is an open source content management system based on the Symfony PHP framework.
You can bet we have a need for well-configured PHP servers.

Learn more about the Apostrophe project here:

Open Source: http://apostrophenow.org

Hosted Service: http://apostrophenow.com

CONTACT

Tom Boutell mostly maintains this. Feel free to drop him a line at tom@punkave.com.
